OPERATION DEEP FREEZE NEWSLATTER
Volume II, No. 6     May 17, 1957

NAF MC MURDO--(May 14)-- A blizzard struck this base today, with 28 hours of 38-knot winds or above. The highest average hourly velocity was 50 knots, and peak gusts reached 82.5 knots.

Hardest hit were wires and antennas, but a minimum of building damage was sustained. A rundown of damage is as follows:

Seventy-five foot pole down in feed-in end of Balboa Rhombic; Balboa Rhobic wire down; New Zealand Rhombic wire down; Palmer Peninsula doublet loosened and split in middle; north-south and east-west doublets loosened; all Rhombic poles have aminimum <!--TYPO--> of two guys each detached, and some poles are held up by one guy only; approximately 1,000 feet of all transmission lines down with standoff insulators snapped and remaining transmission lines loosened considerably; tarpaulin on false roof of transmitter building partly blown off; snow entered transmitter building and found way into some transmitters, but equipment was off at time; one power line pole down; approximately 800 feet of power line down; nine stations on the power amplifier system inoperative; various guy wire failures and resulting 75-foot pole collapse due to turnbuckle loosening and finally paring as a result of vibration in guy wires by high winds.

Estimated completion date for damage repair is June 7, depending upon the weather.

SOUTH POLE STATION--(May 11)-- According to data and records available at this station, a new world's low temperature record was established at the South Pole today. At 2:30p.m. (Greenwich, England, time; 9:30 a.m. EST) the official temperature registered 100&#176; below zero Fahrenheit, marking the low point of two days of steadily falling temperature.

The previous record low was recorded in the northern Siberian village of Verkoyansk in February, 1892, when the thermometer there descended to 90 degrees below zero.

The temperature inside the tunnels surrounding and interconnecting the buildings lags behind the temperature outside, but it was already close in -72&#176;. Moist air from the buildings causes dense fog in the tunnels, reducing visibility to a matter of yards.

Outside the air was perfectly clear as the moon slowly rose above the horizon to cast the only natural light (other than starlight and the Aurora Australis) that will be seen here until the return of the sun on Sept. 23.

The normal routine of the 18 men manning the South Pole continued despite difficulties imposed by the decreasing temperature, and knowing that the thermometer will probably drop another 20 degrees.

By the calendar, winter does not officially begin until June 21, but the frost is already on the "punkins."

LITTLE AMERICA--(May 12)-- Simultaneous with the establishment of the world's lowest official temperature record of -100&#176; Fahrenheit at the South Pole Station, Little America experienced a record-breaking "heat wave."

On May 11 the thermometer at Little America registered plus 30&#176;F., a difference of 130 degrees within a distance of approimately 700 nautical miles.

-- 1 --

The previous all-time high temperature recorded for May at Little America was plus 25 degrees F.

Accompanying the high temperature were record-breaking May gale winds of 60 miles per hour. The previous all-time record for May at Little America was 47 miles per hour.

Heat waves and wind bring more problems to Little America than does cold weather. The roofs of buildings are not constructed to be absolutely waterproof because the exterior roof temperature is below freezing most of the year, thus presenting no problem of leakage. During unusual warm spells such as this, snow melts on the roof surfaces, creating multiple leaks inside.

Also some buildings in sheltered areas of the camp have difficulty keeping cool enough at such times. With the heater control turned to the lowest position, buildings still overheat, thus attesting to effective design for extreme cold and efficient insulation.

High winds blow snow into mountainous drifts. A portion of the new chapel, only three weeks old, is already inundated beneath five feet of snow above roof level. The current storm covered the chimney completely, necessitating the heater to be turned off until the stack can be dug out.

It seems ironical to wish for cold weather in the Antarctic winter, but such is the case at Little America today.

LITTLE AMERICA -- The organization of Deep Freeze II began just over a year ago, May 8, 1956, when MCB Special, Detachment Bravo, was established upon dispatch authority from COMCBLANT. Approximately 60 Bravo personnel had reported for duty. CDR William F. Flynn and five officers were present.

Everyone upon arrival was given thorough physical and mental examinations, offices were being set up and personnel were being deployed to all parts of the country for specialized training.

Looking back, the wholehearted cooperation and encouragement of COMCBLANT in supporting the new organizations was outstanding. Without their help our preparatory work at DAvisville would have been infinitely more difficult and less efficient.

Looking ahead one year, we shall all probably be back in the States recounting to families and friends our experiences in Antarctica, and Deep Freeze II will have become history.

LITTLE AMERICA--(May 11)-- "Operation Treasure Hunt" was suggessful in the fading twilight last week.

Prospectors of the old Yukon had nothing on VX-6 detachment at Little America. Although not hunting gold, local airdales were after treasure in the form of precious spare parts for aircraft--much more valuable down here than gold.

Last year on Deep Freeze I supplies had to be moved in a matter of hours from a chache on the bay ice to the camp site when ice unexpectedly broke up and floated to sea. Much confusion was unaviodable. It was impossible to make accurate records or charts of the location of various supply dumps. Blizzards soon covered everything with snow.

Everything within 100 yards of the camp perimeter was now completely lost. In any direction the snow surface looked the same--perpetual, gently-sloping drifts. Visual inspection and random probing yielded nothing.

-- 2 --

After a study by LT Harvey G. Speed of North Muskegon, Mich, of aerial photos taken last year, LCDR James E. Waldron, Jr., of New Orleans, La., decided to explore certain clues in hope of locating missing spare parts. Supervised by Lt Speed and Lt Robert G. Anderson of Alameda, Calif., the crew began prospecting. After measuring angles and distances from permanent buildings, the areas of greatest probability were staked out. These were combed with a mine detector which proved of little value since the penetration signal into the snow was too shallow.

At this point a D-8 Caterpillar tractor, piloted by Demar E. Ward, Jr., Construction Driver 1/c, of Fort Smith, Ark., was called in. Slowly, almost gingerly, he pushed great drifts of snow aside. Suddenly a crate appeared. Tractor operations were halted and a "Mexican drag line" (long handled shovels) was manned by Bernest G. Melton, aviation machinist's mate 1/c of Wadesboro, N.C. and James C. Leischner, Aviation electronics technician 3/c of Cisco, Ill.

AROUND THE BASES --(May 13)-- Little America: The Little America University of Antarctica is in isession with couress in calculus, Spanish, photography, bible study, choir and drama. Further courses are planned. Recreation hall is 80% completed. Tractor train load test underway. REceived a broadcast from the Russian base, Mirny, of a Radio Moscow tape recording for Valdimir Rastor???uev<!--What even is this name-->, Russian observer and Meteorologist here. Post office moved from the Rec. Hall to Bldg. 5, publicworks building....... NAF McMurdo: Deck completed and Quonset frames up for temporary building  (garage) .... Adare: Lack of tunnel system requires digging out after storms...... South Pole: All communications equipment installed. Glaciology cold lab completed ..... Wilkes: One weasel modified for use as a fire engine with large ladders and fire fighting gear installed. Sixteen by twenty foot wooden shelter erected for photo storage and general <!--typo??-->stowage.

LITTLE AMERICA--May 11-- The Antarctic Beard Club of Little America a growing the bushiest crop of whiskers and the widest variety of beards imaginable. Organized last January by Charles M. Darter, Chief Construction Driver, of Austin, Texas; Kenneth A. Elliot, Construction Driver 1/c of Lancaster, Pa.; Steven Muniz, Construction Driver 2/c of Sugar City, Colo.; and Sterkel L. Coyne, Constructoin Driver 3/c of Piqua, Ohio; the club has expanded to 17 members.

Two qualifications for membership are: Individual must be "man enough" to grow a beard (moustache alone is insufficient), and the man must vow not to shave until he reaches the United States. If the man shaves or permits his beards

--3--

to be removed prior to arrival in the U.S., he must pay a penalty of $5 to every other member. At present this would cost $80.

There are, however, two exceptions to the rule: If the man is directed by the medical officer to shave for health reasons, or if ordered to shave by competent military authority before arrival in the U.S.

The senior club member is Capt W. Mills Dickey, commander of Naval Support Units, Antarctica, of Rusk, Texas. Other members, in addition to the organizers, are Robert S. Ballou, Radioman 3/c, of Roanoke, Va.; Harold D. K. Crain, Utilitiesman 3/c, of Montoursville, Pa.; Forrest E. Durnell, Storekeeper 1/c of Independence, Mo.; Bobbie F. Grice, Radioman 1/c, of Hubbard, Texas; Julian P. Gudmunson, Chief Builder, of St. Paul, Minn.; Robert E. Jones, Construction Driver 2/c, of Surquinsville, Tenn.; Hector K. Lett, Construction Driver 3/c, of Knoxville, Tenn.; Jerry F. Mann, Utilitiesman 3/c, of Quincy, Ill.; Franklin O. Stackhouse, Chief Aviation Electronics Technician, of MEadbille, Pa.; Bernard F. Verboncouer, Chief Quartermaster, of Green Bay, Wisc.; Demar E. Ward, Jr., Construction Driver 1/c, of Fort Smith, Ark.; and William J. Williams, Jr., Chief Radioman, of Harlingen, Tex.

Many people growing beards have not joined the club. The current total is 76 beards, six moustaches and 27 clean-shaven faces. The beards are now long enough for trimming. Interesting styles include Van Dyke, mutton chop, goatee, and handlebar moustache, in addition to natural growth.

All beards must be well groomed, requiring frequent shampoos, brushing and combing. The consensus of opinion is that to have a beard is more time consuming than to shave. Most personnel working outside prefer a beard. It seems to keep the face warmer even though the breath condenses and forms ice on the surface of the beard. It's believed that air trapped in teh beard next to the face provides insulation.

Colors of the beards are sometimes surprising. Chief Stackhouse has dark hair but a red beard. Capt Dickey and Chief Verboncouer have jet black beards marked by sharply definied vertical silver panels approximately one and a half inches in the moustache and chin. Chaplain John E. Zoller of Shelby, Mich., has dark hair but a gray, almost white, beard.

Texture of some beards is soft and silky, while others are wiriy and a few are just fuzz. Some are straight, some wavy and some curly. A few men have recently "come clean" and shaved. It's a startling change in appearance, almost unrecognizable at first. This causes many to speculate if families and friends would recognize them wearing a beard. Some will rely on photos to show their families, while others plan to wear their beards home if military authority permits.

-- 4 --
