OPERATION DEEP FREEZE NEWSLETTER
Volume II, Issue No. 2     April 19,1957

BYRD STATION -- At this Antarctic station IGY scientists were astonished to find ice in the area reaching a depth of 7,800 to 9,750 feet. The scientists believe all this ice rests on land but it is not an established fact as yet.

NAF MCMURDO -- During one of many reconnaissance flights in the vicinity of this airbase, Major S. A. Antos, USMC of Buffalo, N.Y., discovered what may be an Antarctic phenomenon. Situated near Marble Point and the Wilson-Piedmont Glacier, he saw a huge ice tunnel more than a mile long. He described it as, "A huge ice tube that looked as if a draw were frozen over the top of a cavernous hollow formed by melted glacier ice."

SOUTH POLE -- The lowest temperature observed thus far at the South Pole is 89 degrees below zero, recorded on April 2. This temperature exceeded the lowest ever recorded in North America -81 degrees observed at Snag, Yukon Territory, Canada, in Feb, 1947. It is one degree above the all-time world's record of 90 degrees below zero set in northeastern Siberia in Feb. 1933. As late March and early April roughly corresponds to September in the Northern Hemisphere, temperatures are expected to drop to 120 degrees below zero as mid-winter approaches.

WILKES STATION -- The flash of an arm, the roar of a cannon, and 1,800 square feet of net took flight in quest of the skua gull, a bird of Antarctica. this was immediately followed by the rapid crunching sound of men running over hard crusted snow. Such was the scene recently witnessed at this station in Vincennes Bay. Perhaps all but one of the persons who witnessed this spectacle had never seen anything just like it before. The man whose flashing arm gave the signal to fire the salvo was Carl Eklund, scientific leader at this base.

The spectators and participants in this operation saw fire and smoke bellow from three cannon muzzles. The muzzles were protruding about 12 inches out of the snow and aimed at 20 degrees elevation. But the thing that really amazed the onlookers was the sight of the flying net, for through the smoke of the blast the net could be seen being carried by the projectiles. In a low arching flight the net carried up and over and landed enveloping the gluttonous skuas feating <!--this was misspelled in the text--> on the remains of dead seals.

The setting off of the net resulted in a spontaneous rush of viewers to the scene of capture. First to reach the area was Rudolf A. Honkala. Rudy is a U. S. Weather Bureau meteorologist stationed here as an assistant to Mr. Eklund. Right on his heels was Lt. Sheldon W. Grinnell, MC, USNR, of Carbondale, Ill. With a great deal of zeal, Honkala piled onto the net and attempted to grasp one of the trapped birds. His face soon had a look of perplexity and he began to wonder if this flurry of wings and claws was going to evade his grasp. By then he knew that this was no homing pigeon he was dealing with. But the same type of determination that brought him from his home in Salsibury, N. H., to the Antarctic, he managed to capture the bird.

<!-- page break -->

The photographer on the job was Paul F. Noonan, photographer first class, of Boston, Mass. With one continuous movement, Noonan planted his camera tripod and shot a scene of Sydney E. Green, construction driver 3/c, of Rt.1, Colbert, Wash., brining a captured skua gull to Mr. Eklund so the bird could be banded. Mr. Eklund, who lives in Atlanta, Ga., is carrying on this operation in conjunction with his biological research in the Antarctic.

The creatures of this land, like the land itself, are quite mysterious to the outside world. To study them and their habitat is part of the IGY program here. Lt. Grinnell, assisted by Garth H. Stonehocker, chief ionospheric physicist at this station, put the birds in a cardboard carton so that they could be weighed. The gloves and heavy clothing worn by the men serve a twofold purpose. They not only protect them from the cold but also from the flashing claws and beaks of the birds.

One of the last persons to reach the capture area was Richard Berkley of Winter Park, Fla. Berkley, a geomagnetism specialist, manned the detonator which fired the salvo. After all the birds were weighted and banded, Ekund released the birds. The bringing of the cannons and net from the U.S. had proven its merit. This shot, the first of its kind ever made in Antarctica, had netted 13 birds. With the knowledge gained from this capture there will be more abundant catches in the future.

ELLSWORTH STATION -- A member of this station's wintering-over party says Navy cook Edward H. Davis of Clinton, Iowa, does more for morale than all the other base personnel put together. Davis rises at 4 a.m. to prepare early breakfast and his work isn't completed until 7:30 p.m., after the evening meal. He performs his work six days a week with a half day off on Sundays. Due to the heavy work load, vigorous atmosphere and tasty cooking Davis turns out, large amounts of food are being consumed at Ellsworth and the men are continually gaining weight.

Atles F. Lewis, aviation metalsmith 1/c, of Troy, N.C., has gained 25 pounds in five weeks. David estimates the men are eating one and a half times their normal amount of food. They are eating mostly proteins of which there consumption is twice that of a Stateside naval base for the same number of personnel. In the way of meats, Davis is serving mostly veal and pork now because it loses its flavor fastest. He is saving beef for last. There is enough veal, pork, chicken and liver for two more months. Then the fresh meat rations will be supplemented with canned foods. Carbohydrates are being consumed one and a half times above normal.

Due to the bitter cold there are lots of coffee breaks and coffee consumption has climbed to four times normal. Davis believes that with the comfartable <!--misspelled--> prefabricated buildings, recreation hall and nightly movies, this is a soft life compared with previous Antarctic expeditions. But he maintains he would never winter over again and in his own words, "Nothing will look better to me than home."

WILKES STATION -- During March in the Vincennes Bay area, bay waters were still, free of packice. Scientists had begun their studies with comparatively little handicap due to the efficient work of Wilkes wintering-over Seabees. Glacial geology and higher sea levels are being investigated on the Windmill Island group of which Wilkes Station is a part. Heavy drifting and 10 feet of snow now cover the station.

2

LITTLE AMERICA -- Jack Frost is working overtime this year at Little America. The theme song here is "Baby It's Cold Outside." Average temperature during last month was 14 degrees colder than last year. Winter is not yet here but it sure feels like it. April is also off to a good start. Temperature for the first part of April reached 51 degrees below zero.

Personnel are carefully instructed on how to work in such cold weather. Weather is announced at reveille, enabling personnel to dress accordingly. When Working together, they watch each other for signs of frostbite and other cold weather injury. The men welcome coffee breaks which relieve them from extended exposure.

An appendectomy was successfully performed last week by Lt. Pat B. Unger, MC, USNR, of Miami, Fla., on Allen E. Pracht, builder 3/c, of Pittsburgh, Pa. Assisting Dr. Unger were Lt. (jg) Robert J. Adams, DC, USNR, of Memphis, Tenn., Fred A. Milan, physiologist of Andover, Mass., Korean combat veteran Harold E. Butler, hospitalman 3/c, of Gig Harbor, Wash.

Pracht is reported to be convalescing well after the operation. Flashing his usual smile, he said, "It's a relief to have the pain gone. I hope to be back on the job soon."

The first session of the Little America Senate convened recently. This group, part of a special services organization, consists of nine senators elected by and from station personnel. The purpose of the senate is to afford all hands an opportunity through elected representatives to express to the command any comments or suggestions about various aspects of the community life. The group also generates plausible ideas and plans with special attention towards recreation and education.

Senators are: Hugh F. Bennett, seismologist of Chippewa Falls, Wis.; Richard L. Chappell, science aide (Eagle Scout) of Eggertsville, N.Y.; S. L. Coyne, construction driver 3/c, Piqua, Ohio; K. A. Elliott, construction driver 1/c, of Lancaster, Pa.; C. W. Jenkins, hospitalman 3/c, of Gig Harbor, Wash.; W. F. Kraut, radioman 1/c, of Bridgeport, Conn.; A. E. Prachy, builder 3/c, of Pittsburgh, Pa.; G. H. Stewart, aviation machinist's mate 2/c, of Minneapolis, Minn.; and Earl Tracy, aviation electrician's mate 1/c, of Granada Hills, Calif.

Patterned after the federal government of big America, the Little America special services also includes a cabinet, supreme court and president. The cabinet is composed of five appointed persons headed by Special Services Officer LCDR R. E. Hancock, SC, USN, of Alexandria, Va. Others are Chaplain Zoller, Medical Officer Lt. Unger, and VX-6 member Lt. R. G. Anderson of Alameda, Calif. The Supreme Court has three justices: Chief Justice is LCDR H. J. Orndorff, USNR, of Nutterfort, W. Va., Officer in Charge of Little America; LCDR J. E. Waldron Jr., USNR, of New Orleans, La., Officer in Charge of VX-6; and A. P. Grary, Deputy Chief Scientist, of Oakford, Pa. Purpose of the supreme court is to provide counsel of command heads in matters pertaining to the general good and order and to approve or disapprove recommendations and initiate action corresponding that which the commanding officer would make.

The President is Capt. W. M. Dickey, USN, of Rusk, Tex., Commander Naval Support Units, Antarctica. He reviews all acts of the lower bodies. In a small way, with certain modifications, special services operates as a miniature American government. It stimulates interest and provides good training in democracy.

3

ALL BASES -- Capt. Dickey reports from his Little America headquarters that radio reports from all U. S. Antarctic bases states health and morale excellent. In a request from the stations for items for ships to bring down on Deep Freeze III, ping pong balls and sun lamps are big items.

LITTLE AMERICA -- The chapel-library at this station, to be called the "Richard E. Byrd Memorial Chapel," has been erected and awaits only the arrival of Easter to be officially dedicated.

ELLSWORTH STATION -- The responsibility of maintenance and repair of heavy duty D-4 and D-8 tractors here rests largely on one man, Walter L. Davis, construction mechanic 1/c, of Benton City, Mo. He is the only Navy mechanic here and has six Caterpillar tractors and six "weasels" to keep in operation. One of his major jobs on the vehicles so far has been getting them started in the 36 degree below zero weather.

The 12 year veteran of Okinawa, Europe and Africa has served as a heavy equipment mechanic and is especially suited for the vigorous Antarctic extremes, having served in Greenland. A typical day for Davis consists of supplying three buildings with snow which is melted into water. He accomplishes this by scooping up the snow with a D-3 tractor and dumping it on the roofs of the buildings. Then if the vehicle is in repair he tackles that. If not he continues on construction and maintenance of the base. He also maintains and repairs the diesel electric generators that supply the base with electricity. Davis is looking forward to the end of the long Antarctic winter night and the return to the United States. He would like a tour of recruiting duty. In his own words, "one year down here is long enough."

BYRD STATION -- Time goes fast in the Antarctic and days are hard to keep up with. Sometimes so much that men even forget their own birthdays, as in the case of "Uncle" Jack R. Fenrod, builder 3/c, of Wetunka, Okla. He entered the mess hall for lunch April 4 after doing some extra work that happened to come up and made him a few minutes late. Station cook, Robert D. Marsh, commissaryman 1/c, of Nicktown, PA., had known about his birthday for some time and had been making arrangements which included a large devil's food cake with white icing and chocolate lettering. One candle was set atop an empty medicine bottle in the center of the table and singing by all hands helped create the proper atmosphere for the occasion.

Gorden Abbey, radioman 1/c, of Union Gap, Wash., W. E. Lowe, radioman 1/c, of Decatur, Ill., and W. D. Welch, electronics technician 3/c, of Atlanta, Ga., worked most of the week in temperatures as low as 68 degrees below zero to construct Welch's pet project a rhombic antenna for our amateur radio. The antenna was completed and is now receiving some very good signal reports from Stateside amateurs.

The Byrd Station Choir, composed of C. E. Reynolds, construction electrician 1/c, of Wilmington, Del.; D. D. Blubaugh, construction mechanic 3/c, of Ursina, Pa.; J. R. Penrod, builder 3/c, of Wetumka, Okla.; R. D. Marsh, commissaryman 1/c of Nicktown, Pa.; and Wes Morris, IGY meteorologist, of Sault Ste. Marie, Mich., at the piano, made its first public appearance at Sunday religious services and proved a great success.

Quite a few auroral displays have been seen here lately, but the most significant one was sighted by Edward A. Alf, Meteorologist, of Apple Valley, Calif., while making late evening weather observations. Everyone was awed by its

4

ghostly beauty. It looked light green to very pale red, and ran roughly north and south, making slow weaving motions.

LITTLE AMERICA -- "Operation Incubator" now belongs to the ages.

Lt. (jg) Robert J. Adams, DC, USNR, of Memphis, Tenn., has announced that all hope for the six New Zealand eggs selected for incubation has been abandoned. Final cnadling <!--typo--> revealed no growth since last week.

The project provided fun during leisure time and an interesting diversion from duty. Dr. Adams commented, "In every man there remains a trace of the little boy. Perhaps this helps explain why husky Seabees, after doing a hard day's work, enjoyed trying to raise live chicks for Easter. We appreciate the interest and good wishes from our many friends in the States, and regret the project was unsuccessful."

NAF MCMURDO -- (April 16) -- Approach of the Antarctic of the Antarctic night and shortened daylight have restricted outdoor work, and a recreation program is in effect for whatever leisure time is available.

An enlisted recreation council was formed and includes Louis R. Maher, chief electronics technician, of Olathe, Kan.; Richard D. Harden, chief air controlman, Forth Worth, Tex.; Donald E. Blackenship, builder 1/c, Highland, Calif.; Marcus Riley, construction driver 1/c, of Danville, Ill.; John E Custer, machinery repairman 1/c, of Springfield, Ill.; Henry J. Deeks, construction mechanic 1/c, of Islington, Mass.; Joseph J. Malla, construction electrician 2/c, Detroit, Mich.; Alfred J. Swetokos, aviation machinist's mate 3/c, Flushing, N.Y.; and Richard C. Martin, aviation electronic technician 3/c, Memphis, Tenn.

The initiative of the council and the willingness of the men result in a well-rounded program. Off duty volunteers have converted a building into a recreation hall, complete with ping pong tables, pool, shuffleboard, reading lounge and music.

An empty quonset hut was made into a gym through the ingenuity of Robert L. Farnam, aviation electrician's mate 1/c, of Lewiston, Idaho; James K. Kennedy, aviation electronics technician 3/c, Cortland, N. Y.; Moses L. Vigil, Jr., aviation machinist's mate 2/c, Denver, Colo.; Kenneth L. Alkio, aviation electronics technician 2/c, Eureka, Calif.; and Estile G. Miller, airman, of Besoco, W. Va. The gym features weight lifting apparatus, mats, and a steam bath box operated through a series of coils and an overhead drum.

Marshall F. "Rocky" Jones, photographer 1/c, of Van Nuys, Calif., conducts a photography class twice weekly after movies. About 20 men sacrifice sleeping time to become better shutter bugs.

Edward C. Schenketh, parachute rigger 1/c, of Flushing, N.Y., worked long hours to convert an Atwell tent into a hobby shop, stocked with building materials, kits and models.

Other activities include movies, weekly bingo, and a one-hour Saturday evening social. Each week's program is supplied by the occupants of the respective huts. Last Saturday the officers performed courageously as the "Kool Kats" and presented a unique program with self-made costumes and repetitive music--they only knew two songs.

SOUTH POLE -- (Delayed) -- In the ever lessening twilight, two weeks after sunset and the beginning of the winter night, limited outside work still continues

5

at this isolate station. The temperatures, which has been consistently decreasing, rose during the day from minus 87 in the early morning to an unseasonably warm minus 59 at midnight. Winds increased from 13 knots to 26 knots, with gusts up to 31 knots. A further rise of both temperatures and winds is anticipated, also a greater amount of blowing snow.

As the sun circles the Pole at approximately 6 degrees below the horizon, the earth's shadow is seen as a portion of black semicircle along the horizon opposite the sun's azimuth, and the Antarctic at twilight remains uniform during a 24 hour period. The first stars appeared March 31 and now are seen in increasing numbers.

At low temperatures exhaled breath emits a characteristic crackling roar like steam escaping from an open valve and creates light fog throughout the tunnels. Outside work of any type is increasingly difficult as temperatures drop. Altitude (approximately 9,200 feet) causes more rapid breathing than normal when heavy work is being done. Cold air burns the throat and chest necessitating a shorter pace with frequent breaks to catch your breath and resume normal breathing.

The main tunnel at the South Pole station will be approximately 12 feet beneath the surface, six feet wide and eight feet high, with branch tunnels off the sides at regular intervals.

Approximately 150 cubic feet of snow is required each day to be melted for drinking water and other uses. The snow will be man-hauled from now on due to the fact that cold weather precludes the use of tractors or weasels for hauling it. All vehicles are in hibernation for the winter.

Despite the seemingly bleak aspect of our present environment, it is one of constant interest to all. Even in minus 80 degree weather, personnel have been able to work outside for up to three hours at a stretch without undue discomfort. Time passes quickly and morale continues to be high in anticipation of a successful year.

ELLSWORTH STATION -- The air support for IGY activities here is being accomplished with two DeHavilland Otter aircraft and one HO4S helicopter. Here again in the great Antarctic continent, responsibilities must fall upon a few.

Such is the case of Atles F. Lewis, aviation mechanics for the Otter aircraft stationed here. In Antarctica each flight requires the flight mechanic to spend approximately three hours working on the aircraft prior to take-off. The facilities with which to work are few, and each plane must have the snow brushed from it, the ice melted, the engine pre-heated and the fuel for the most part pumped by hand, in addition to giving regular engine checks.

Although many flights have been flown already, the main support program will begin in September, during the next Antarctic spring. With the planes safely put away from the winter months, Lewis will be busy setting up shop and helping separate supplies stored in the aviation building.

In October Lewis' present enlistment will expire, and he will be the first man to reenlist here. He has already decided on the next duty he desires. First he wants to go to flight engineers school and then to Hawaii for duty as a flight engineer on a Super Constellation.

6

LITTLE AMERICA -- This Station intends to secure its helicopter for the winter due to the frigid weather. All aircraft have been put away for the winter except one Otter and one R4D. Construction of Kiel airfield antenna farm is underway. Health and morale at Little America is excellent. Only 25 per cent of the cargo deposited on the ice barrier by DF II supply ships still remains there. The other 75 per cent has been safely returned to the Station.

ELLSWORTH STATION -- Items and amounts, food-wise, for the wintering-over party here have been satisfactory with few exceptions. It is recommended, though, that in the future there be less rabbit, prunes, rhubarb, collard greens, and frankfurters, and more popcorn.

New items recommended for next year's wintering party include fresh frozen carrots, dill pickles, canned honey, chocolate chips, dehydrated cabbage, glazed citron peel, and vanilla extract tablets.

A few utensils and table-ware items that might be useful are serving forks and spoons, one bolt of turkish toweling, doughnut cutters, 96 boxes of tooth-picks, three dozen ash trays, and 50 Christmas menus.

//////////COLUMN 1////////////////////
Operation Deep Freeze Newsletter
Volume II, No. 2 -- April 19, 1957

Phone Liberty 5-6700, Ext. 66675

Duplicated and distributed by:
Commander
Naval Construction Battalions, Atlantic
Construction Battalion Center
Davisville, Rhode Island

///////////COLUMN 2////////////////////
Commander, U.S. Naval Support
Force, Antarctica
Room 214, Bldg. D.
6th & Independence Ave., SW
Washington 25, D.C.
