OPERATION DEEP FREEZE NEWSLETTER
Volume I, Issue No. 1
April 8, 1957

(EDITORS NOTE: This is the first in a series of newsletters to dependents of men wintering over in the Antarctic. Information in the newsletter comes principally from material received by radio in Washington. Each base has been asked to file occasional stories to let you know what is going on during the winter night in Antarctica.)

OPERATION INCUBATOR
LITTLE AMERICA (Delayed) -- (The following story was received from Little America Station via radio messages from Lt. John E. Zoller, CHC, USN, of Bonita Springs, Fla.) On Feb. 16, 1957, an air shipment of fresh eggs from New Zealand arrived at Little America. While inspecting the eggs Dental Officer Lt. Robert J. Adams, DC, USNR, of Memphis, Tenn., wondered if any of them were fertile. Assisted by William R. Burns, RM3, USN, of Flint, Mich., and Boyd D. Russell, RM3, USN, of Waco, Texas, they selected six for incubation. Even Richard H. Banasiak, CSI, USN, of Ballston Lake, N. Y., the cook, approved, perhaps wiht hope for future fresh eggs and poultry.

A Dental Incubator for scientific study of oral flora was utilized. Correct temperature to hatch eggs was unknown. We consulted a research man for a culture of a living virus within the egg. Yesterday, Dr. Adams handled the eggs. He was elated at two positive embryos and two possible ones. The dental laboratory is now the crossroads of the Little America Station. Everyone wants to see the eggs. Strict visiting hours have been set up. Interest is tremendous and there is much speculation as to sex, color, breed and birthdate of the unborn chick. All hands are anticipating the day the chicken will hatch. Estimated time of arrival is March 9th.

We believe this will be the first chicken ever hatched within the Antarctic Circle. If the chick survives, Dr. Adams plans to bring the history-making bird home. He says, "Considering the 3,000 mile flight from New Zealand, extended exposure to cold and the age of the egg, this is a miracle". "We almost anticipate the chicken will hatch with earmuffs and mukluks. I am beginning to know how an expectant mother feels".

A name is needed for such a fabulous fowl. Friends in the United States are invited to submit suggestions. A progress report will follow next week.

Operation Incubator Progress Report Two (Delayed) -- Preparations continue to welcome eagerly awaited chick. A deluxe corrugated box brooder fitted with the only 25-watt bulb at Little America keeps the temperature at a constant 98 degrees. The brooder has an enclosed courtyard for exercise feeding and
(more-next page-more)

ventilating

Lt. Adams narrowly averted a chick catastrophe when the power failed for three hours. Grasping an alcohol blowtorch, he rushed to the rescue and kept the incubator at the proper temperature using candle light illumination. Dr. Adams is becoming more like a mother hen every day. His face beams every time he handles eggs or discusses the chick.

A carefully concocted feed mix includes oatmeal, wheat grain, cornmeal, powdered eggs and milk. Expected chicks drinking water is spiked with terramycin and multiple vitamin complex. A crushed china dish and egg shells will provide roughage since no sand or gravel is available here.

The Little America Midwives Association is now an effective organ. They will commence egg inspection every half hour on March 7th and continue until the blessed event occurs. Dr. Adams has been designated the attending physician. Midwives are William R. Burns, Thomas Gehringer, CE3, USN, of Allentown, Pa., and Boyd D. Russell. The poor motherless chick will still need a name. Progress report three will follow next week.

Operation Incubator Progress Report Three (Delayed) -- Sadness settled like soft snow over Little America March 10th when a tragic communique was issued from sick bay that the baby chick was stillborn. Grief-stricken obstetrician Dr. Adams and midwives Burns, Gehringer and Russell were nearly prostrate. Banasiak the cook accepted the news stoically. "It was too much to hope for I guess, fresh eggs and young friers all winter".

In the interest of science a post-mortem autopsy was performed by Medical Officer Lt. Pat B. Unger, MC, USNR, of Miami, Fla. He stated, "On close investigation I found an embryo of approxiamtely ten days well formed". "Cause of death undetermined, however, evidence of Big Eye, scourge of the Antarctic, was present". Further inestigation is pending.

Hope still remains for several other eggs being carefully nurtured in the incubator. Every conceivable precaution has been taken. We are trying to duplicate exactly the care of a mother hen. Eggs are being turned daily. Midwives are practiciing how to cluck like a hen. We now have volunteers to massage the eggs with bushy beards in lieu of a caress by a mother hen's feathers. Another progress report will follow next week.

Operation Incubator Progress Report Four (Delayed) -- No stone has been left unturned in our all out effort to <!--typo-->insure that the final dozen eggs left here at Little America Station by the Coast Guard icebreaker NORTHWIND on her last cruise into the Antarctic produce a live chick. The eggs were transferred from the NORTHWIND to Little America Station and carefully handled between the

(more-next page-more)

ship and the base by Dr. Adams. All hope has now been abandoned for the former eggs.

Tender, loving care for the eggs includes daily turning by clucking midwives with fingers covered in feathers from a pillow and daily puzzling with a curly beard by William F. Kraut, RM, USN, of Bridgeport, Conn. Two eggs are being nurtured by Harold E.<--!TYPO BUTLER-->Buelter, HM, USN, of East St. Louis, Ill., in a replica of a hen's nest constructed from cotton fixed atop an old steam iron which provides thermostat heat control and humidity. The thermostat failed recently and Butler became an emergency human incubator, gently cradling the eggs under his arm. The thermostat registers the exact correct temperature. Somewhat surprised, Butler asked, "What does that make me"?

In order to determine the amount of time to keep the eggs out of the incubator, corresponding to the time a hen would be off the nest, a meticulous stop-watch study of mother hen's routine and actions has been made. For an accurate estimate, guinea pig Butler attempted to duplicate the exact action of the hen. His comment was, "It sure is different chewing raw oatmeal and tilting my head back to swallow". "I'm glad to do it, but the study was not complete, for some actions which are not native to a hen I cannot duplicate". Progress report five will follow next week.

Operation Incubator Progress Report Five (Delayed) -- This is "the long Wait". Day after day the eggs look the same. What goes on inside the eggs is an unseen vital matter. All personnel here are hoping there will be a chick for Easter.

Today Dr. Adams himself handled and turned the eggs gently. He reported some change since handling them a week ago. "Should know for sure if we will have a chick in two weeks", he said.

Several days ago Butler discussed the project via Ham Phone Patch with his father, Robert F. Butler, an ex-farmer of East St. Louis, Ill., through the facilities of Ham Radio WOOBJ, Preston A. Richardson of Ladue, Mo. Mr. Butler verified the correct temperature, <!--typo-->freqnency of turning the eggs and the incubator period but he warned against expecting too much because of the long exposure to cold prior to incubation and the unlikely fact that fertile eggs <!--typo-->wuuld be found in commercial stock for consumption.

Nevertheless, all hands at Little America are doing their utmost in their spare time for success.

(EDITORS NOTE: The Operation Deep Freeze Newsletter will carry the results of Operation Incubator in its next edition. Final results of the Operation had not been transmitted from Little America at mailing time.)

(more-next page-more)
