OPERATION DEEP FREEZE NEWSLETTER
Volume II, No. 5    May 10, 1957

LITTLE AMERICA -- Little America's "ice dentists" are at work again filling a cavity in a crevasse.

One mile from camp on the road to the barrier it is necessary to cross a mysterious creeping crevasse. This is the eight<!--TYPO--> time the crevasse has been filled since January. It keeps opening and no one knows what happens to the hundreds of tons of snow which are used to fill it each time.

The crevasse is like a jagged gorge approximately 50 feet deep, crossing the road at a 90&deg; angle. By descending on a rope ladder to the bottom of the crevasse, a man can walk one quarter mile in either direction from the road, hemmed in by the towering cliffs of glistening blue granite-like ice, varying from 10 to 20 feet apart.

A man's first trip into such a crevasse is fascinating but terrifying. The ghostly silence is overwhelming and unnerving. But the silence is not prolonged, for intermittently one will hear a deep rumble, muffled booming, rasping groan or sharp, cracking, splintering sounds. It is the imperceptible movement of the ice, as if it were wincing in excruciating pain under the relentless pressure of its own weight, aggravated by the perpetually undulating sea beneath. This, combined with a feeling of utter impotence should the walls of ice give away (which the eerie sounds seem to suggest) will reduce all but the bravest souls to flight.

On April 28 the oceanographic study group reported a crack 18 inches wide across the road upon their return from the barrier. This was a tipoff of an open crevasse beneath, transforming the road into a booby trap.

The next day, in minus 54&deg; weather whipped by a 15-knot wind, a repair team composed of LCDR Howard J. Orndorff, Officer in Charge of Little America, of Nutterfort, W. Va.; LTJG Robert K. White of Glen Falls, N.Y.; Julian P. Gudmunson, Chief Buioder <!--TYPO-->, of St. Paul, Minn.; Charles M. Darter, Chief Construction Driver, of Austin, Texas; Robert W. Anderson, Electronics Technician 3/c, of White City, Kan.; and Alvin L. Miller, Constructin Driver 2/c, of Milton, Fla.; tackled the job armed with dynamite and a D-8 tractor.

Anderson is a veteran of conquering crevasses, having explored approximately 100 of them last November when blazing the 647 mile trail to Byrd Station. He sometimes swung at the end of a 50-foot rope like a pendulum, planting blasting charges at the most vulnerable spot deep in the jaws of a crevasse.

Gudmunson is a seasoned expert in ice blasting, having worked as right hand man to Arctic Specialist MAJ Merle R. Dawson, USAR, last January when they changed the face of the barrier by carving a berth for cargo ships, and in the process creating what might have been the first man-made Antarctic icebergs.

Miller is a versatile, indefatigible<--TYPO--> worker and hardened to intense cold by daily exposure. He drove a D-8 tractor on a 1300 mile record round-trip to Byrd Station.

Like capable dentists the repair team proceeded to clean the cavity carefully before filling. Eight blasts later all were aghast at the yawning chasm before them which a short time earlier had been the road. In the dim light of the sunless Antarctic winter dusk, Darter mounted his roaring iron monster, clicked on the floodlights and began pushing mountainous heaps of snow into the crevasse. With the touch of a genius he handled the gargantuan tractor as if it were a toy, advancing to the lip of the crevasse, then watching the snow cascade like a tumbling white waterfall into the abyss below.

Final phase of the operation was to pack the snowfill solid by running the 38-ton tractor over it numerous times. Now the road is as good as new. Once again the spectacular has been the routine in the Antarctic.

HAM RADIO ASSISTANCE OFFERED -- A letter was received this week from Mr. George C. Kanney of LaPorte, Indiana, a "ham" radio operator who is interested in lending assistance to Deep Freeze men in Antarctica and their families at home.

Mr. Kanney says "...I have a schedule with station KC4USB every night (Byrd Station)...and would be glad to handle any traffic for the scientists or personnel at this station for about four months."

Mr. Kanney operates amateur station W9ETM. Anyone interested in taking advantage of his generous offer is invated to contact Mr. Kanney at 412 Woodson St., LaPorte, Indiana.

NAF MCMURDO -- (May 8) -- Construction crews here have worked five 24-hour days to complete the first in a series of buildings which will replace the garage destroyed by fire April 28. The Seabees met the five-day schedule set by themselves, in spite of difficult weather conditions and a shortage of adequate materials and tools.

The finished building will house the garage, carpenter, machine, welding, and electrician shops, and a spare parts room.

Other McMurdo residents have turned their talents to gardening.

CDR William F. Flynn, Commanding Officer of MCB Special, of Dedham, Mass.; LCDR Scott W. Marshall, Officer in Charge of McMurdo, of Wichita, Kan.; and Martin K. Hanson, Chief Construction Driver, of Sioux Falls, N.D., have succedded in producing radishes, believed to be the first grown in the Antarctic. Various seeds and plants have been carefully nurtured by the gardeners in a box garden located in a heated Quonset hut.

In the near future the "green thumb" experts hope to add fresh lettuce, tomatoes, onions, and red and green peppers to the local food supply. Nasturtiums, marigolds and sweetpeas will satisfy esthetic tastes and brighten the Antarctic camp.

AROUND THE BASES: Little America -- Construction of "ham" radio shack and hobby lockers in recreation hall 50% completed. Hi-fi installation underway. Library and education office cabinets and bookshelves 80% completed. Installation of fire warning devices in tunnels completed......NAF McMurdo -- Ice runway in good condition. April weather summary: Average monthly temp.; -10.5&deg;F; monthly high, plus 12&deg;F; monthly low, -33&deg;F.......Byrd Station -- Fuel cache covered by two-foot snow drift. Flags and bamboo stakes salvaged from old runway for use on new runway in spring.....Pole Station -- Observatory interior completed. Interior glaciology cold laboratory 75% completed. (Continued next page.)

-2-

Wilkes Station -- Minor building and equipment repairs proceeding. Over 100 icebergs visible from station. SNow<!--TYPO--> cover now zero to 12 feet....Ellsworth Station -- April weather summary: Average monthly temp., -9.04&deg;F; monthly high, plus 24.8&deg;F, on the 4th; monthly low, -34.6&deg;F, on the 9th.

WILKES STATION -- (April 29) -- Through his glasses Norwegian Glaciologist Olav Loken had been studying a seal lying on an ice floe in nearby Frogman Cove. He decided definitely it was a rare Ross Seal.

Leaving his vantage point on the overhanging rocks he hurried to make known his discovery to the other men at the station. At about 2 p.m. Station Scientific Leader Carl R. Eklund of Atlanta, Ga., came on the intercom system and announced the discovery to everyone, stating that an attempt would be made to collect the creature for the National Museum.

From a hill which separates the station from the cove, the men watched Rudolf A. Honkala, Meteorologist, of Salisbury, N.H., and LTJG Donald R. Burnett of Mount Clemens, Mich., raise their rifles and take careful aim at the seal which was lying on an ice floe about 30 yards out in the cove.

Reminding them to be careful not to hit the seal's skull, Eklund gave them the signal to fire. The animal was an easy target and died quickly.

Now they were sure the seal itself would not escape, but it began to look like the outgoing tide might float the floe out to sea. They had to get a line on the dead seal quickly. Honkala and Garth H. Stonehocker, Ionospheric Physicist, of Portsmouth, Va., dragged a 20-foot ladder down to the ice edge, followed by Duane J. Wonsey, Construction Mechanic Constructionman,, of Elm Hall, Mich., and David Daniel, Commissaryman 3/c, of Fairfield, Texas, carrying coils of line.

Tying the line about him and laying the ladder across the dangerously thin ice, Honkala inched his way toward the floe where the dead seal lay. When he reached the floe he cut a hole in the seal's jaw and tied the line through it. While he was doint<!--TYPO--> this Wonsey had gone to get a "weasel" which would be used to tow the huge carcass to shore.

When the treaded vehicle was in position, Daniel, who had been tending the line to Honkala, secured the line to the rear of the weasel. With a wave from Honkala, Wonsey was given the go-ahead. With a large splash the rare mammal was hauled from the floe, through the thin ice to shore.

On measuring the seal it was found to be 102 inches long from the tip of his tail to his nose. The estimated weight was between 700 and 800 pounds. This was a great day for Wilkes Station as there have been few Ross Seals ever collected.

LITTLE AMERICA -- The setting sun brigs<!--TYPO--> colder weather at this station and the falling temperature sharply reduces outdoor work.

Average mean temperature for April was four degrees colder than last year, seven degrees colder than the all-time average, and 12 degrees colder than last month.

Comparison of Fahrenheit temperatures for April at Little America are as follows: Last year--High, plus 9&deg;; low, -53&deg;; mean temperature, -23&deg;. This year--High, plus 10&deg;; low -55&deg;; mean temperature -27&deg;. All-time high is plus 27.5&deg;; low, -58&deg;; mean temperature, -20&deg;.    (Continued next page)

--3--

Average daily fluctuation of temperature during April was 20 degrees: from an average daily maximum of -17&deg; to an average daily minimum of -37&deg;.

Peak wind velocity was slightly lower this year than the all-time record for April.  This
