OPERATION DEEP FREEZE NEWSLETTER
Vol. II, No. 4     May 3, 1957

Man's ever-present curiosity and interest in world affairs shows itself even in the isolated world of Antarctica. At both the MCMURDO SOUND and LITTLE AMERICA bases weekly newspapers are being printed.

The enthusiastically received "McMurdo News" contains national and international news and station items. There are also a chaplain's corner, "Aerological dartboard" (weather summary), doctor's column, and personality profiles.

The Little America Publication is called "The Penguin Post." The paper is mimeographed Saturday night and delivered to the barracks and officers' quarters, ready for Sunday morning readers. Stateside papers were never devoured more avidly than these. With no TV or newsreels, only static-punctuated short-wave, and no current U.S. magazines, everyone is parched for news.

"The Penguin Post" features include "News of the World Beyond US," "News of the World Around Us," (Antarctica), sports, science notes, Man of the Week, weather roundup, chaplain's column, Letters to the Editor, jokes and cartoons, entertainment, and society section (personals). The paper averages eight pages.

Name for the Little America paper was selected by the local Senate. Wide-spread interest was indicated by the fact that 85 names were submitted for the paper including "Deep Freeze Breeze," "Ice-O-Lated Post," "Crevasse Crier," and "Sastrugi Sayings."

"Penguin Post" is co-edited by the Navy and IGY men. Editors are Calvin L. Larsen, chief photographer's mate, of Culbertson, Mont., and Ronald C. Taylor, IGY Meteorologist, of San Gabriel, Calif. Reporters are William F. Kraut, radioman 1/c, of Bridgeport, Conn.; Boyd D. Russell, radioman 3/c, of Forth <!--typo--> Worth, Tex.; Paul C. Dalrymple, IGY Glaciologist, of Cochituate, Mass.; and Bruce J. Lieske, IGY Meteorologist, of Silver Springs, Md. Chaplain John E. Zoller of Shelby, Mich., is advisor.

Little America is also considering adding several "foreign correspondents" to the Post staff in the form of "ham" radio operators in various areas of the world.

AROUND THE BASES --(April 30)--Little America: A 16 by 20 foot gymnasium has been completed behind the recreation hall. Heaters have been installed in the theatre. Furniture, shelves and cabinets are 20% completed in the library. An R4D of VX-6 has made one local flight. A second flight was aborted when the plane's wing tip dragged at takeoff, causing minor damage....NAFMcMurdo: Ice runway is in good condition. Ice in channel broken by Glacier has reached  a thickness of 40 inches......Byrd Station: Tunnel which was partially collapsed by snow has been repaired and strengthened...Wilkes Station: Minor building damage was sustained when 83-knot winds arched roofs.

LITTLE AMERICA--(April 29)--The Little America "ham" radio station, KC4USA, made an unusual contact recently. On April 14 Carl O. Wyman, IGY Ionospheric Physicist, of Philadelphia, received a ham radio phone call from friends Frank and Ruth Leeming of Red Bank, N.J.

(1)

The unusual feature of the call was that it originated from the Leeming's 26 foot cabin cruiser at sea off the New Jersey coast. Leeming called a telephone operator via marine radio-telephone; the operator called Julius M. J. Madey, operator of amateur station K2KGJ in Clark, N.J.; Madey called Bobbie F. Grice, radioman 1/c, of Hubbard, Texas, who was the radio operator on duty at Little America; and the radio-telephone contact between Leeming and Wyman was made complete.

The "path" was excellent. Wyman was surprised even for the experienced amateur operator that he is. He bought his first crystal short wave receiver when a boy, and sold newspapers to pay for it.

In 1926, when in the Marine Corps, he built a ham station in Nicaragua and carried some of the first emergency humanitarian traffic for service personnel. He was communications officer in the Marines, Pacific Theater, during the second World War, and in 1948 he was recalled to Washington for active duty with the Electronic Warfare Program. Since release from active duty as a Lieutenant Colonel in 1955, he has continued ham radio activities. He holds an amateur license number K2VAV.

At Little America Wyman will soon start classes for beginners desiring to learn code and try for a ham operator's license.

BYRD STATION --(April 29)-- At this isolated, inland base, 647 miles west of Little America, the last sunrise of the season was witnessed on Easter Sunday morning. Special messages were sent and received through the courtesy of "ham" radio operators.

At sunset on Easter Day a tape recording sounded taps and the American flag over Byrd station was hauled down for the Antarctic night. There is now a sense of urgency about completing the remaining outside work during the few remaining weeks of twilight.

WILKES STATION--(April 30)-- Much activity is centered around the local ladder cribbage tournament. Holding the title within a week were Rudolf A. Honkala, IGY Meteorologist, of Salisbury, N. H.; David Daniel, commissaryman 3/c, of Fairfiled<!--typo-->, Texas; and Carl R. Eklund, station scientific leader, of Atlanta, Ga.

Robert L. Long, Jr., Ionospheric Physicist, of Rochester, N.Y., after trying out a ski ride behind three dogs, reported considerable disagreement between where he wanted to go and where the dogs went. Billie R. Lilienthal, aerographer's, mate 3/c, of Ashland, Nebr., has spent his long night watches making slipcovers for our badly soiled lounge chairs.

Sidney E. Green, construction driver 3/c, of Colbert, Wash.; Edward A. Bousquet, utilitiesman 3/c, of Worcester, Mass.; Carl T. Bailey, Aerographer's mate 3/c, of Lee, Mass.; and Lt. Sheldon W. Grinnell, station doctor of Carbondale, Ill., have spent Sunday holidays helping Scientific Leader Eklund with biological field work.

George E. Magee, builder 1/c of Malden, N.Y., sidelined from his carpentry with a sore arm, has been spending much of his time operating the amateur radio station. This has helped remove some of the load from Frederick E. Charlton, chief electronics technician, of Muncie, Ind.; Donald L. Bradford, radioman, 1/c,

(2)

of Mesa, Ariz.; Kenneth J. Hailstorm, radioman 3/c, of Gallup, N.M.; and Garth H. Stonehocker, Ionospheric Physicist, of Portsmouth, Va., who had been hard pressed trying to make "ham" radio contacts for station personnel.

Paul A. Wyche, aerographer's mate 1/c, of Macon, Ga., is suffering from a sprained ankle. He twisted it while carrying water out to the balloon release shelter. Gilbert Lewart, IGY Seismologist, of Cloverdale, Calif., has recorded his first earthquake. It came from the area south of Australia.

Ralph Glasgal, IGY Auroral Physicist, of New York City, is watching his sleeping hours being cut down as the lengthening nights increase the time he must spend making observations.

LITTLE AMERICA--(April 24)--The long night commenced today. Bidding farewell to the sun for the last time until next August, all hands except those on duty assembled near the flagpole at 11:15 in the morning for the appropriate ceremony of lowering the colors.

In minus 40 degree temperature and with drifted snow casting long purple shadows in the setting sun's almost horizontal orange rays, Bernard F. Verboncouer, cheif quartermaster, of Green Bay, Wisc., and Arthur W. Baldwin, chief radioman, of Hermosa Beach, Calif., lowered the blizzard-bitten national ensign at 11:28.

Lt. John E. Zoller, Chaplain, of Shelby, Mich., offered a prayer of thanksgiving for divine providence and a petition for continued care on behalf of all men of all nations spending the coming winter on teh white continent.

After the colors were lowered, Lcdr Howard J. Orndorff, Officer in Charge of Little America, of Nutterfort, W. Va., presented the flag to Capt. W. Mills Dickey, Commander of Naval Support Units, Antarctica, of Rusk, Texas, as a memento from all the station personnel. In accepting the flag, Capt. Dickey said, "This is quite an occasion since we will be in the Antarctic only one night. Manana we will be going home. Many thanks for the flag. It is somewhat tattered but very well preserved and frosty with meaning." He then declared the rest of the day "rope yarn Sunday" (Navy terminology for a holdiay).

Everyone chuckled when the "Orders of the Night" were published (as contrasted with the Navy's standard "Plan of the Day."). Examples of the orders include: "Personnel caught in the habitat of penguins, skua gulls and seals during daylight hours will be punished as a court martial may direct." "Personnel caught casting lights into the sky or in any other way competing with aurora studies shall be guilty of prefabricating auroras and shall be known as aurora specialists.""All liberty has been cancelled for tonight." "These orders will be cancelled automatically upon the next rising of the sun."

Others in the flag-lowering formation were company commanders Lcdr James E. Waldron, Jr., of New Orleans; Lt. Harvey G. Speed, of North Muskegon, Mich.; Lt(jg) Robert K. White, of Glenn Falls, N.Y.; and Lt(jg) Peter A. Raynolds, of Woodland Hills, Calif.; and platoon leaders Lt. Robert G. Anderson of Alameda, Calif.; Edward W. Camp, Jr.; chief construction mechanic, of Darby, Pa.; and William J. Williams, Jr., chief radioman, of Harlingen, Texas.

Although the sun will not reappear for four months, progressively shortening periods of twilight will occur for several weeks. This soft gentle light with predominant orange hues creates strikingly beautiful effects upon crystalline texture of the snow and ice. This period is popularly referred to as "Indian Summer of the Antarctic."

(3)

ELLSWORTH STATION--(April 28)--Radio communication in Antarctica offers a challenge to any radioman. This was one of the factors which caused Charles W. Forlidas, radioman 2/c, of Clemson, S.C., to volunteer for Operation Deep Freeze.

A radioman's work in the Antarctic is not all indoors. In putting up antennas Forlidas and fellow communications man, Robert E. Haskill, radioman 1/c, of North Highland, Calif., worked in temperatures 35 degrees below zero. Now ice continually builds on the antenna wire and must be cleared to cut down radio transmission difficulties.

Before radio operations could get underway the radio room, the three transmitters, seven receivers and mobile equipment had to be assembled by the operators. Equipment intended for shore installations are having to be made to fit and operate. For a small station, Ellsworth handles a large amount of radio traffic, making necessary an around the clock operation with shifts of 12 hours each.

Another job that falls under Forlidas and Haskill is taking their turns at operating the "ham" equipment. Everyone here relies on the skill and patience of our radiomen and the "ham" operators in the States who pass personel messages to and from our wives and families.

After his year in the Antarctic, Forlidas is looking forward to returning to Clemson, S.C., College. He attended there a year before joining the Navy.

LITTLE AMERICA-- Harold E. Butler, hospitalman 1/c, of East St. Louis, Ill., is the first man of Deep Freeze II to be discharged and reenlisted at Little America. After receiving his honorable discharge, handlebar-moustached Butler became subject to much good-natured ribbing about being a "sandcrab for a day."

A lengthy humorous discussion occurred in the messhall, as to whether or not Butler was entitled to eat there. William R. Denney, commissaryman 2/c, of Raymond Wash., ruled to feed him without charge since he was slated to reenlist the next day. (Legally, a Navyman is a civilian for 24 hours between enlistments.)

Butler was sworn in by Lcdr Howard J. Orndorff, commanding officer of Little America, of Nutterfort, W. Va., for a six-year reenlistment. This is his second six-year "shipping over." An enthusiastic career man, Butler has nine years continuous active duty.

His primary task here is senior corpsman, assisting the medical and dental officers. The doctors say Butler's excellent professional ability is enhanced by a pleasant sense of humor and a sincere concern for the welfare of the patients. Prior to coming to the Antarctic, Butler served three years as a hospitalman with the Marine Corps, one year of which was in Korean combat. He then spent over two years at the Naval Hospital, Great Lakes, Ill.

Upon return to the U.S. after his year at Little America, Butler is aiming high. He has requested duty at the White House dispensary.

NAF MCMURDO--Fire destroyed the garage building April 28. No men were seriously injured.

Estimated cost of the blaze is $106,000. This includes the building proper, a 35-ton Caterprillar tractor, a lathe, a saw, an electric drive air compressor,

(4)

a 5-k.w. floodlight trailer, an electric arc welder, two Herman Nelson portable heaters, approximately 2500 feet of keying cable and all shop hand and small power tools.

No Deep Freeze II Caterpillar parts were destroyed. Limited special and mechanical tools will handicap vehicle maintenance somewhat.

Cause of the fire has not been determined but an investigation is being made. The fire was first discovered at 6:15 a.m. (1:15 p.m., Saturday, April 27, EST) and was brought under control four and a half hours later.

Construction of a combination panel and quonset rib and canvas lean-to building has commenced.

McMurdo is the largest of seven U.S. bases in the Antarctic. Its 34 houses are occupied by 87 military personnel during the Antarctic winter which began April 21. The garage building was several hundred feet from the nearest barracks building.

(Admiral Dufek said in Washington, "The fire and its losses will not affect the accomplishment of our mission for the IGY in any way.")

Principal mission of the base is tp support air operations. Planes operating from the ice airstrip dropped materials to build a science base at the South Pole during the past Antarctic summer.

LITTLE AMERICA--Lieutenant Commander James E. Waldron of New Orleans, officer in charge of the VX-6 detachment here, recently treated everyone to a party celebrating promotion to his present rank. Date of rank is retroactive to Feb. 1.

First entering the Navy in July 1943, Waldron's duty has always been in aviation. After receiving his wings in <ay, 1945, he took advanced flight training, then joined a ferry command until his release from active duty the following year.

Volunteering to return to active service in June, 1951, he was ordered to Pensacola, Fla., for helicopter training. Lcdr Waldrom has since logged 1600 hours of helicopter flying time, serving aboard seven carriers and making six rescues of pilots form the water. In December, 1954, he was rushed to Honduras to participate in rescue of flood victims. He flew almost continuously for a week, evacuating survivors from roof tops, trees, high ground, and transporting medical aid.

Since coming to Antarctica, Waldrom has piloted aircraft to the Pole twice, to Byrd Station four times, plus numerous flights to McMurdo. He is the senior helicopter pilot here.

WILKES STATION--(April 29)--On March 13 six men were sitting in a 16-foot-square Jamesway hut that provided living space at Wilkes Station's inland icecap satellite, They were enjoying an enforced rest period brought on by one of the weather phenomena unique in the Antarctic, the "whiteout."

The men were Carl R. Ekund, station scientific leader of Macon, Ga.; Richard L. Cameron, IGY Glaciologist, of Cambridge, Mass.; and Paul F. Noonan, photographer's mate 1/c, of Dorchester, Mass. The "whiteout" condition--enveloping

(5)

whiteness and complete lack of horizon--had brought their science studies to a standstill.

They had set out from Wilkes Station at dawn two days earlier. The site for their satellite station, an important part in the Wilkes IGY program, had to be far enough inland for the climate to be representative of the entire icecap, and the snow over had to be deep enough to dig a 100-foot pit for glaciological studies.

By midday they had covered 30 miles after having considerable difficulty getting their weasels and sleds over the moraine, a rocky barrier extending along the edge of the icecap. Clear weather prevailed until late the following day. After following steep trails and experiencing many weasel failures, the party arrived at the 40-mile point, about 4,000-foot elevation, and located a site for the inland station.

Erection of the hut was immediately started, while Honkala set up a mast for making meteorological observations. Cameron, Loken and Moljorn set out ice movement stakes for glaciology studies. Then the "whiteout" moved in and all work had to be stopped.

But the inland station had been established. The difficulty of supplying the large quantities of fuel that would be needed to operate the inland satellite was discussed furing <!--TYPO--> the period of "whiteout." The impracticability of performing the operation with the fast but fragile weasels was generally agreed upon. It was decided that the possibility of making a supply trip to the icecap with a D-4 tractor should be discussed with Robert McIntyre, construction mechanic 2/c, of Oxnard, Calif., and Lt (jg) Donald R. Burnett, of Mt, Clemens, Mich., when they returned to Wilkes Station.

On the 16th weather finally cleared enough to allow all to return to the main base, except Cameron and Loken, who remained behind to continue their studies.

ELLSWORTH STATION--(May 1)--One of the younger members of this station is 20-year-old L. R. Larson, aviation electronics technician 3/c, of Rochester, N.Y.

Larson came to Deep Freeze following a tour of duty aboard the aircraft carrier USS Princeton on the west coast. He learned that Air Development Squadron Six was looking for volunteers for the Antarctic trek, and he immediately requested the duty.

His request was accepted and he was sent to Quonset Point, R.I., home of VX-6. A few months later he was aboard the Navy cargo ship USS WYANDOT, bound for the Weddell Sea.

Before joining the Navy in 1954, Larson attended Edison Technical and Industrial high school. After initial Navy training he was selected to attend the Navy's Aviation Electronic Technician School in Memphis, Tenn.

Since reaching the Antarctic, Larson has participated in all phases of the construction of Ellsworth Station, including assembly of two DeHavilland Otter aircraft, raising antenna, driving a D-4 tractor and maintenance of the aircraft electronic gear.

A misleading statement was published in last week's Newsletter. The record balloon observation ascent we reported was a record for the McMurdo base only, not an Antarctic or world record. We regret the error.

(6)
