Operation Deep Freeze Newsletter
Vol II, No. 3         April 26, 1957

LITTLE AMERICA -- The major portion of the non-sectarian Easter sunrise service at Little America was dedication of the New Richard E. Byrd chapel.

Services were conducted, commencing at the time the sun rose, at approximately 10 a.m. However, the service was unique in that the sun set at about the same time the service was concluded. Two days after Easter marked the last sunrise until next August.

The new chapel is by far the most beautiful building at Little America. All have followed its construction with interest. From the laying of its foundations to finishing its pews, every task has been done conscientiously, even reverently. Volunteers carved the foundation from hard-packed snow on a crisp, clear day when the temperature hovered in the minus fifties. Quickly the framework of the 16 by 40 foot Jamesway building went up, and was them trimly covered with snug spun-glass insulated blanket sections.

The chancel section of the chapel is raised six inches above the nave and separated by a communion rail exquisitely hand finished. The chancel contains stalls for a small choir on the left side, an elevated mahogany altar in the center, the pulpit and electronic piano on the right. American and Christian flags flank the altar. The altar is dressed with a maroon velour cover bearing the words "Holy Holy Holy" in gold across the front piece edged with gold fringe, reversible cross-crucifix, matched vases and candlesticks, two seven-branch candelabra, and a missal stand. A dossal hanging behind the altar is of heavy blue velour extending from the arching ceiling to the deck. Flanking the dossal are white woolen panels reaching to the curving walls. The deck is soft green polished tile. The entire chancel area is illuminated by concealed overhead floodlights.

The nave is fitted with hand-hewn pews containing built-in kneelers and screens in front of the first pew on each side. All woodwork is stained mahogany. The center aisle and the area between the pew screens and chancel is green vinyl tile with an inlaid cross of white tile centered in the aisle. Remainder of the deck is battleship green linoleum. Interior walls are light green with dark olive green framework. The chapel will seat approximately 40.

Skilled cabinet maker John E. Reilly, builder 1/c, of New Orleans, assisted by Jack C. Rees, construction driver 2/c of West Warwick, R. I., designed and built the chancel communion rail, and pews, and did most of the interior finishing. Supervising construction of the building were Lt. (jg) Robert K. White of Glens Falls, N. Y., and Julian P Gudmunson, chief builder, of St. Paul, Minn. Many other volunteers participated in the construction. All at Little America believe Admiral Byrd would be pleased and proud to know that this chapel bears his name.

(All news items from Little America are prepared by Chaplain John E. Zoller, Lt., USN, of Shelby, Mich.)

(Page 1)

NAF MCMURDO -- This station played host to New Zealanders on Easter Sunday. Eighteen men from the New Zealand Scott base, with their leader Sit Edmund Hillary of Mt. Everest fame, accepted an invitation to Easter dinner and joined U.S. personnel at divine services.

The chapel, "Our Lady of the Snows," was appropriately decorated with artificial Easter lilies. Catholic mass and Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament was offered by Father Leon S. Darkowski of Pittsburgh, Pa. Protestant services were held by lay leader Robert H. Wakeman, radioman 2/c. of Walton, N. Y., with Lt. Donald C. Hauck, DC, of Kandiyott, Minn., at the organ.

Other activities included attendance at movies, a hi-fi concert featuring Handel's "Messiah," and competitive games in the recreation hall. The guests expressed appreciation for the hospitality and invited McMurdo personnel to visit Scott Base. The U.S. and New Zealand bases are two miles apart. Much good will has been promoted through this exchange of social courtesies.

AROUND THE BASES -- NAF MCMURDO: Ground Control Approach (flight radar) equipment has been disassembled for maintenance. Ice runway in good condition. . . . . . SOUTH POLE: Eight by twelve foot shell for glaciology laboratory has been completed. Two Rawinsonde observations (radar tracking of weather balloons) have been made daily since April 15 . . . . . BYRD STATION: Tunnel was partially collapsed due to the weight of a snow drift . . . . . WILKES STATION: Highly successful voice radio contact has been made with Little America.

WILKES STATION -- (April 22) -- Easy access to the icecap and good surface for 50 miles inland indicate ideal conditions for extensive traverse from this station. The traverse as projected would provide geophysical and geographical studies over one of the greatest unexplored regions of Antarctica.

The proposed trail is from Wilkes along the 110th East Meridian. The primary advantage of this route is the presence of fixed stations at the ends and middle of the trail to provide control for scientific observations.

It is proposed the trail operations will begin in late November, using a D-4 Caterpillar tractor and "weasels," with a second D-4 for partial support. The D-4 proved effective here pulling 20 tons to the satellite station in land at 4,000 foot elevation.

Seismic shots, magnetic observations, and glaciological studies are contemplated at intervals of 50 to 75 miles, with gravity and surface meteorological observations at 10-mil intervals.

LITTLE AMERICA -- Champion "pole sitter" at Little America is John Kieffer, electronics technical 3/c, of Napa, Calif. A volunteer to climb antenna poles to install insulators and wire, Kieffer's conquest of nearly fifty poles makes him undisputed champ.

Perched atop a pole in minutes fifty degrees weather, buffeted by bitter winds, and clumsy in heavy Antarctic clothing, the job is no picnic. Every possible safety precaution including spurs, safety belt and boatswain's chair is used.

Kieffer is an old hand at climbing. Before enlisting he had his own set of spurs and cleared fire breaks in the forest of his family's property.

(Page 2)

Assisting in the operation is Thomas E. Gehringer, construction electrician 3/c, of Allentown, PA., a veteran lineman. When stationed on Guam, prior to volunteering for Deep Freeze, he maintained 150 antenna poles ranging 90 to 110 feet high at the Naval Communications Station there.

Gehringer says, "Clinging to the top of a pole in blazing 90-degree sun is quite a contrast to doing it at 50 below."

LITTLE AMERICA -- Intense cold plays strange tricks on outdoor workers. Dropping into the minus fifties, the chill factor is vastly increased by sharp winds. Richard Hills, photographer 2/c, of Fayette, Ala., after taking pictures atop a fuel tank, jumped off only to discover he couldn't bend his knees. His cold weather trousers had frozen stiff.

Freezing of a more disturbing nature was encountered by Jack. C Rees, construction driver 2/c, of West Warwick, R. I., and Lt. John E. Zoller, ChC, of Shelby, Mich. Their nostrils closed up tight with ice.

A screwdriver snapped like glass when pressure was applied. Combustion handwarmers in exterior parka pockets went out because the fuel reached a temperature too low to burn.

Calvin L. Larson, chief photographer, of Culbertson, Mont., was unable to replace a slide in his plastic plateholder after taking a picture because the plateholder contracted in the cold after the slide was removed. He is limited to the use of a few wooden plateholders. Film pack, roll and movie film become brittle and snap when advanced in the camera.

VX-6 pilot Lt. Harvey G. Speed of North Muskegon, Mich., was unable to retract skis on his R4D aircraft after takeoff. Engine heat and exhaust vaporized air immediately froze on the landing gear and temporarily converted it into "fixed gear" type.

Its all in a day's work--but how different from a day's work in the States.

PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS to and from ANTARCTICA

Communications between men stationed in the Antarctic and their families in the States may be carried out by these methods: (1) Naval Communications Telegrams, and (2) "Hamgrams."

Telegrams are handled by the Naval Communication Station, Washington 25, D. C. The cost for this service is Western Union charges from wherever the telegram is filed to Washington. Under ordinary circumstances the following subjects are acceptable or not acceptable:

Acceptable: (a) Matters of life or death (b) Matters of personal arrangements or important personal business, not of a recurrent nature (c) Birth announcements in the immediate family.

Not Acceptable: (a) Trivial, indecent or frivilous messages. (b) Holiday or anniversary greetings (c) Messages of unnecessary length (d) Ordinary congratulatory messages (e) Frequent or recurrent messages pertaining to the conduct of a commercial venture. (f) Business solicitations by a commercial enterprise.

How to address telegrams: Man's name, Rate or Rank, Serial or File No., and Antarctic Command. Example: John D. Doe, YNI, 000 00 00; NAF McMurdo; c/o Naval Communication Station; Washington 25, D. C.

"Hamgrams" are the type of communication handled by amateur radio operators. "Ham" is the slang term for a licensed amateur radio operator. There is no cost for messages passed through amateur radio facilities, other than the cost required

(continued next page)    (Page 3)

to deliver the intended message to the "ham" station operator.

The following address is that of a capable amateur radio operator who has been very successful in handling messages to and from Antarctica: Paul A. Blum, 101 Kristin Road, North Syracuse, N. Y.

It is sometimes possible to arrange telephone conversations between the States and Antarctic bases through the amateur radio facilities. To accomplish this, interested parties should address a post card to: Julius M. J. Madey, 1037 Raritan Road, Clark, New Jersey. Your post card should include person's name and his station in Antarctica. The cost of this service will be for long distance phone from where you make the call to Clark, N. J.

The Red Cross has been extremely helpful in effective delivery of messages via ham operators between the States and Antarctica. Inquiry should be made of your local Red Cross representative for complete details.

LITTLE AMERICA -- The last of the Mohicans has been discovered at Little America. All hands hardly believed what they saw at breakfast the other day. Some shook their heads; others rubbed their eyes; all were bewildered.

In the mess hall were what appeared to be half a dozen Indians. The striking feature was the unusual haircut. Each "Indian" had a two-inch crew-cut strip extending from the center of his forehead, back across his head top and tapering to a point at the base of his neck. All other hair was removed.

The tribal affiliation is unknown, but it's suspected that they may be the last of the Mohicans. Much good natured joking and critical observations were made about the shape of the heads, bumps, knots and skin texture. There was also some speculation as to whether the hair will return. The "Indians" unanimously hope it will.

A few new phrases were added to the camp vocabulary, including, "ugh" and "how." It was suggested that the aurora-sky watch be alert for smoke signals on the horizon.

When asked why such unusual haircuts, Robert W. Anderson, electronics technician 3/c, of White City, Kan., explained "This helps us observe a rule of the Antarctic. Never panic--always keep a cool head." He explained that one unexpected problem that has developed is placing your head on the pillow in such a fashion as to prevent it from sliding off during sleep.

Other "Indians" are Charles M. Darter, chief construction driver, of Austin, Texas; Kenneth A. Elliot, construction driver 1/c of Fort Smith, Ark.; Steven Muniz, construction driver 2/c, of Sugar City, Colo.; and John A. Hricsina, constructionman of Franklin, Pa.

NAF MCMURDO -- (April 24) -- A new Antarctic record has been set by Navy aerologists at this station.

A radiosonde balloon (for recording temperature, air pressure and humidity, plus wind direction and velocity) sent aloft at 10 minutes past noon remained airborne and was tracked until 4:11 p.m., when the signal faded due to battery failure.

The balloon rose to a record 96,276 feet. Temperature at this altitude was minus 87.7 degrees F. The balloon was 70 miles form the station.

The weather equipment was sent up by Elmer A Erdie, aerographer's mate 1/c, of Buffalo, N.Y., and Ronald W. Palmer, aerographer's mate 2/c, of Seattle, Wash. Palmer and Avril T. Creacy, aerographer's mate 3/c, of Gatesville, Texas,

(continued next page) (Page 4)

were on watch when the recordings were made. Bobby D. Fancher, aerographer's mate 3/c, of Carlsbad, N.M., was off duty at the time and missed the excitement, but he will have an opportunity to aim at a new record later.

Two balloons are released daily, at midnight and noon. Lt. (jg) Bernard Fridovich, aerology officer, of New York City, is very proud of his men and their work. They spend long hours, sometimes over 20 hours at a stretch, getting weather recordings and observations.

ELLSWORTH STATION -- (April 17) -- Unlike previous expeditions to Antarctica, we now have the use of electricity 24 hours a day for our work and comfort. The one primarily responsible for getting this into operation and flawlessly maintaining the generators is James. L Hannah, construction electrician 1/c, of Memphis, Tenn.

Ellsworth Station was taken over by wintering-over personnel in February, with the construction of electrical systems for the most part still unfinished. Remaining to be completed was the power house, consisting of five generators, wiring connections for the 17 buildings, and wiring for the storage tunnel lighting.

As the Seabees' only electrician, Hannah was kept busy days and often nights with these tasks. Having now completed the electrical systems, he has the responsibility of maintaining these systems throughout the year. He also maintains the heating systems.

Hannah, a Texan, began his Navy career in 1947. He has been a Seabee electrician during his 10 years of service. His foreign service has included Alaska, Guam, Cuba, and Africa. Hannah volunteered to come to Antarctica because it would be a new experience, and he is one of several who are considering remaining here another year.

LITTLE AMERICA -- (April 13) -- The first bingo party of the year was a howling success. Planned by the Little America Senate and supervised by Lt. Robert G. Anderson of Alameda, Calif., the party was started with a "happy hour" and buffet supper.

Master of Ceremonies William J. "Wild Bill" Cromie, IGY Glaciologist from Long Island, N.Y., called the bingo, cracked jokes, introduced the floor show, and recited an original poem of his own composition entitled, "The Ballad of the Barrier Ledge," a clever yarn of dubious dealings on the ice.

Music was provided by "Cumbie's Combo," led by William A. Cumbie, aviation electronics technician 2/c, of Milton, Fla., a hoe down expert from away back who plays a hot electric guitar. Blowing up a storm on harmonica was Bobbie F. Grice, radioman 1/c, of Hubbard, Texas. Jazz piano was pounded out by Eagle Scout Richard L. Chappell, scientist aid, from Eggertsville, N.Y., and slapping a solid, home-made bass was stogie-smoking Ens. Earl R. Hills of Chattanooga, Tenn. The bass was rigged from a washtub, swab handle, and taut cord.

An hilarious impromptu entertainer was Rocco A. "Rock" Taurisano, commissaryman 1/c, of Cambridge, Mass., sometimes called "The Great Stone Face." His impersionation of Hildgarde in falsetto soprano brought down the house. Abundant talent and ambitious plans insure many outstanding future parties.

(Page 5)
